Prepare repository for VAST v1.1.0-rc1 (#2094)
tenzir/vast: CHANGELOG.md

This changelog documents all notable changes to VAST and is updated on every release. Changes made since the last release are in the [changelog/unreleased directory][unreleased].

## [v1.1.0-rc1]

### :warning: Changes

- VAST no longer attempts to intepret query expressions as Sigma rules automatically. Instead, this functionality moved to a dedicated `sigma` query language plugin that must explicitly enabled at build time.
  [#2074](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2074)

- The `msgpack` encoding option is now deprecated. VAST issues a warning on startup and automatically uses the `arrow` encoding instead. A future version of VAST will remove this option entirely.
  [#2087](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2087)

> - The experimental aging feature is now deprecated. If you require this feature, please contact us about the [compaction plugin](https://docs.tenzir.com/vast/features/compaction) which is its more capable replacement.

Author: I took the remaining wording suggestion, but used aging over ageing.

> - The experimental aging feature is now deprecated. If you require this feature, please contact us about the [compaction plugin](https://docs.tenzir.com/vast/features/compaction) which is its more capable replacement.

Reviewer: You're right, eagle eye!

  [#2087](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2087)

### :gift: Features

> - The built-in 'select' transform step may now use filter expressions that match *all* events of the input.

Author: I think the changelog entry is actually wrong, the bug fix for project and select was that we did not handle transformations correctly that dropped all columns and rows respectively.

  [#2064](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2064)

> - VAST has a new `query_language` plugin type that allows for adding additional query language frontends. The plugin performs one function: compile a string into a VAST expression. The new `sigma` plugin demonstrates usage of this plugin type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- VAST has a new *query language plugin* that allows for adding additional query language frontends. The plugin performs one function: compile user input into a VAST expression. The new `sigma` plugin demonstrates usage of this plugin type.
```

Author: This is wrong. There's an abstraction for query language plugins, but that does not mean that there is a query language plugin.

Author: I took your suggestion, but left in the word type.

Reviewer: Makes sense, actually.

  [#2074](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2074)

- The new built-in `rename` transform step allows for renaming event types as part of a transformation. This is especially useful when you want to ensure that a repeatedly triggered transformation does not affect already transformed events.
  [#2076](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2076)

> - The new `aggregate` transform plugin allows for flexibly grouping and aggregating events. We recommend using it alongside the [`compaction` plugin](https://docs.tenzir.com/vast/features/compaction), e.g., for compacting `suricata.flow` or `zeek.conn` events after a certain amount of time in the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The new `aggregate` transform plugin allows for flexibly grouping and aggregating events. We recommend using it alongside the [`compaction` plugin](https://docs.tenzir.com/vast/features/compaction), e.g., for rolling up events into a more space-efficient representation after a certain amount of time.
```

  [#2076](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2076)

### :beetle: Bug Fixes

> - A long-standing performance bug in the first stage of query evaluation caused VAST to possibly consider candidate partitions for the second stage of query evaluation for fields with matching name suffixes, but mismatching types. This bug no longer exists, and should result in a considerable speedup of some queries.

Author: Your rewrite dropped the information about mismatching types.

> - A long-standing performance bug in the first stage of query evaluation caused VAST to possibly consider candidate partitions for the second stage of query evaluation for fields with matching name suffixes, but mismatching types. This bug no longer exists, and should result in a considerable speedup of some queries.

Author: I rewrote your suggestion slightly to include that information again.

This changelog documents all notable changes to VAST and is updated on every release. Changes made since the last release are in the [changelog/unreleased directory][unreleased].

## [v1.1.0-rc1]

### :zap: Breaking Changes

- VAST has a new transform API: the `apply()` function is changed to `add()` and `finish()`. The `add()` function receives arrow batches instead of `table_slice`s. Multiple calls to the `add()` function adds multiple batches to the transformation, and the `finish()` function returns the transformed slices; this enables the transform to change multiple table slices simultaneously.

>   [#2020](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2020)

Author: This isn't really user-facing; let's remove it.

  [#2087](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2087)

- The experimental aging feature is now deprecated. If you require this feature, please contact us about the [compaction plugin](https://docs.tenzir.com/vast/features/compaction) which is its more capable replacement.
  [#2087](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2087)

### :gift: Features

- The built-in 'select' transform step may now use filter expressions that match *all* events of the input.
  [#2064](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2064)

- VAST has a new `query_language` plugin type that allows for adding additional query language frontends. The plugin performs one function: compile a string into a VAST expression. The new `sigma` plugin demonstrates usage of this plugin type.
  [#2074](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2074)

- The new builtin `rename` transform step allows for renaming event types as part of a transformation. This is especially useful when you want to ensure that a repeatedly triggered transformation does not affect already transformed events.
  [#2076](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2076)

> - The new `aggregate` transform plugin allows for flexibly grouping and aggregating events. We recommend using it alongside the [`compaction` plugin](https://docs.tenzir.com/vast/features/compaction), e.g., for compaction `suricata.flow` or `zeek.conn` events after a certain amount of time in the database.

Author: ```suggestion
- The new `aggregate` transform plugin allows for flexibly grouping and aggregating events. We recommend using it alongside the [`compaction` plugin](https://docs.tenzir.com/vast/features/compaction), e.g., for compacting `suricata.flow` or `zeek.conn` events after a certain amount of time in the database.
```

  [#2076](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2076)

### :beetle: Bug Fixes

- A long-standing performance bug that caused query evaluation to look at more candidate partitions than necessary no longer exists: A query for `ts`, e.g., for matching the field `zeek.conn.ts`, stops evaluating unrelated fields that end in `ts`, e.g., `suricata.flow.flow.pkts` at an earlier point in the pipeline. Similarly, a field exactly named `ts` of a type incompatible with the query will no longer lead to the partition being considered.

>   [#2086](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/2086)

Author: This has way too much detail, users don't need so many details here.
